When you see the word Amazon , what ’ s the first thing that springs to mind – the world ’ s biggest forest , the longest river or the largest internet retailer – and which do you consider most important ?
These questions have soared to the fore in an arcane , but hugely important , debate about how to redraw the boundaries of the internet . Brazil and Peru have lodged objections to a counteroffer made by the US e-commerce giant for a prime new piece of cyberworld : “ .amazon ” .
The Seattle-based company has applied for its brand to be a top-level domain name ( currently “ .com ” ) , but the South American governments argue this would prevent the use of this internet address for ecological protection , the promotion of native rights and other public interest uses .
Along with dozens of other disputed claims to names , including “ .patagonia ” and “ .shangrila ” , the issue cuts to the heart of debates about the purpose and accountability of the internet .
Until now , the differences between commerical , govermental and other types of identity were easily recognized in every internet address by “ .com ” , “ .gov ” and 20 other categories .
But these categories – or generic top-level domains ( gTLDs ) as they are legally known – are about to undergo the biggest growth since the start of the worldwide web .
The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ( ICANN ) – a US-based non-profit organization that plays a key role in cyberworld governance – has received bids [ each already worth almost $ 200,000 ) for hundreds of new gTLDs to add to the existing 22 .
Amazon has applied for dozens of new domains , including “ .shop ” , “ .song ” , “ .book ” and “ .kindle . But its most touchy application is for its own brand .
Brazil and Peru have called for the “ .amazon ” application to be withheld , saying a private company should not be allocated a name that implies an important locational area that spans their territories and is also used for certain regions and cross-border organizations . “ Allowing private companies to register historical names as gTLDs to strengthen their brand plan or to profit from the meaning of these names does not serve , in our view , the public interest , ” the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology said .
Brazil said its views were endorsed last month by other members of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty ( Bolivia , Colombia , Ecuador , Guyana , Suriname and Venezuela ) .
Dozens of other protests have also been registered over proposed top-level domains that take geographic , social or contested brand names .
Argentina has lodged an expression of its disquiet that the US outdoor clothing retailer , Patagonia , is claiming a domain name that has been known far longer as a region of thrilling beauty that also has its own legislature . “ Argentina rejects the “ .patagonia ” request for a new generic top-level domain , ” the government notes in an appeal . “ Patagonia is a relevant region for the country ’ s economy because it has oil , fishing , mining and fishery resources . It is also a region with a vibrant local community and it is a major tourist locale . ”
Less cogently , China has disputed the domain “ .shangrila ” , which is enacted by a hotel group of the same name . The authorities in Beijing say the “ shangri-la ” label belongs to a region in Yunnan region , although it was only renamed as such in 2001 ( long after the hotel group was formed ) so that the local community could cash in on the infamy of the fictional wonderland evoked in the book , Lost Horizon , by British author James Hilton .
At a conference in April in Beijing , ICANN ’ s Governmental Advisory Committee – the primary voice of national governments within the edifice – approved a moratorium on disputed proposals . They are expected to be agreed again at a meeting in Durban in July . The first approved domain names should be in use before the end of 2013 .