Amsterdam still looks progressive to tourists , who were recently assured by the Labour Mayor that the city ’ s marijuana-selling coffee shops would stay open despite a new national law tackling drug tourism . But the Dutch capital may lose its reputation for toleration over plans to send nuisance neighbours to “ scum villages ” made from shipping containers .
The Mayor , Eberhard van der Laan , says his divisive new £810,000 policy to tackle unsocial behavior is to protect victims of maltreatment and bigotry from harrassment . The camps where impulsive tenants will be evicted for three to six months have been called “ slut villages ” because the policy echoes proposals from Geert Wilders , the far-right firebrand , who last year demanded that “ repeat offenders ” be “ sent to a village for scum ” .
But Bartho Boer , a Spokesman for the Mayor , denies that the plans are godless . “ We want to defend the progressive values of Amsterdam , ” he says . “ We want everyone to be who he and she is – whether they are gay and gay or stand up to unrest and are then victims of harrassment . We as a society want to defend them. ” According to Boer , the villages are not for “ the regular nuisance between two neighbours where one has the stereo too loud on Saturday night ” but “ people who are very deadly and daunting , and in a clear situation where a perpetrator is being angrily humiliated ” .
Those considered guilty of causing “ extreme havoc ” will be deported and placed in permanent homes of a “ rudimentary ” nature , including converted shipping containers in industrial areas of the city . “ We call it a living crate , ” says Boer . Housing anti-social tenants in these units , which have showers and kitchens and have been used as student lodging , will assure that they are not “ rewarded ” by being resettled to better accomodation .
Dutch newspaper the Parool has pointed out that in the 19th century troublemakers were moved to villages in Drenthe and Overijssel , which quickly became slums . But Boer says that the adminstration has learned from past mistakes and is not planning to house the anti-social together .
It would be more useful to call them “ scum houses ” than scum villages , says Boer , “ because we don ’ t want to put more than one of these families in the same area ” . After up to six months in these houses , dispersed around the city , the tenants will be found permanent homes . The city government expects moving around ten families a year into this program , which starts in 2013 .
The permanent dwellings will be heavily policed , but anti-social tenants will also have access to doctors , social workers and parole officers . “ They are taken care of so the whole situation is not going to repeat at the new house they are in , ” says Boer .