Amsterdam still looks leftish to tourists , who were recently reassured by the Labour Mayor that the city ’ s marijuana-selling coffee shops would stay open despite a new national law tackling drug touristry . But the Dutch capital may lose its reputation for toleration over plans to send nuissance neighbors to “ scum villages ” made from shipping crates .
The Mayor , Eberhard van der Laan , says his contentious new £810,000 policy to confront unsocial activity is to protect individuals of misuse and bigotry from harrasment . The camps where impulsive tenants will be rehoused for three to six months have been called “ scum villages ” because the policy echoes plans from Geert Wilders , the far-right populist , who last year demanded that “ repeat offenders ” be “ sent to a village for scum ” .
But Bartho Boer , a spokeman for the Mayor , disavows that the plans are illiberal . “ We want to defend the liberal values of Amsterdam , ” he says . “ We want everyone to be who he and she is – whether they are gay and lesbian or stand up to violance and are then victims of harrasment . We as a society want to defend them. ” According to Boer , the villages are not for “ the regular nuissance between two neighbors where one has the stereo too loud on Saturday night ” but “ people who are extremely lurid and daunting , and in a clear situation where a perpetrator is being angrily attacked ” .
Those considered guilty of causing “ extreme havoc ” will be evicted and placed in temporary homes of a “ basic ” nature , including converted shipping crates in industrial areas of the city . “ We call it a living container , ” says Boer . Housing antisocial tenants in these units , which have showers and kitchens and have been used as student accomodation , will insure that they are not “ rewarded ” by being moved to better accomodation .
Dutch newspaper the Parool has pointed out that in the 19th century sulkers were moved to villages in Drenthe and Overijssel , which rapidly became slums . But Boer says that the Administration has learned from past mistakes and is not planning to house the antisocial together .
It would be more useful to call them “ scum houses ” than scum villages , says Boer , “ because we don ’ t want to put more than one of these families in the same area ” . After up to six months in these houses , dispersed around the city , the tenants will be found temporary homes . The city government expects moving around ten families a year into this program , which starts in 2013 .
The temporary homes will be heavily policed , but antisocial tenants will also have access to doctors , social workers and parole officers . “ They are taken care of so the whole situation is not going to repeat at the new house they are in , ” says Boer .