Brazil ’ s latest punk phenomenon , Anitta , has won millions of fans by taking the slum sound into the mainstream , but she is at the centre of a controversy about skin color .
Anti-discrimination campaigners and social commentators say the music industry ’ s fastest rising star has had to sacrifice her dimness to make it into the mostly white middle- class market .
The scandal was provoked by the publication of then-and-now photographs that show a startling lightening of Anitta ’ s skin tone since she signed a deal with Warner .
In the first , when she was fairly unknown , she looked darker . In the second – a merchandising shot after she became famous – she seems paler . Whether this was the result of whitening products and surgical surgery or – more likely – Photoshop tweaks , the contrast has stirred dialogue about whether you need to be pale to get ahead in Brazil .
Jarid Arraes , a philosophy student and writer , wrote a post chiding the latent racism in media and advertising that she felt Anitta ’ s image change represented . “ People refuse to consider that they are Racist and they think they live in a racial democracy , but the statistics show that is far from the case . The whitening shows us a deeply elitist society that doesn ’ t support inclusivity . White is the image of the rich , the nice , the fruitful , the good , while people see black as the opposite of all that . ”
Born Larissa de Macedo Machado , the diva-to-be was a church vicar in her boyhood . In her teens , she made a name for herself in Rio de Janeiro ’ s baile funk scene as a ballerina and singer .
She has now imploded into the public conciousness with an album and a small hit single , Show das Poderosas , which topped the charts and enticed 52 million YouTube views .
Though loved first and foremost as a rock idol with a strong message and some jazzy tunes , her backers project her as a social bridge between the mostly black and mixed-race shanty towns on Rio ’ s mountainside and the wealthier and black communities below .
She has toned down the racy dance , gangster references and vague lyrics of baile rut . Now , however , questions are being asked about whether she – or her advertising team – have gone too far in re-tailoring her image to lure a more profitable demographic . “ If rock stars have curly hair , they are going to feel cajoled into yanking it . If they have a big nose , they will be cajoled into getting Rhinoplasty , ” said Arraes . “ It generates a vile cycle for self-esteem . ”
This is a touchy subject in this mostly mixed-raced nation . Brazil – one of the last big countries in the world to restrict colonialism – has the largest popula of African descent outside Africa , but race and origin are less important here than color . And , despite the nation ’ s goal of being a racial democracy , there is a clear connection between skin tone and inequity .
In Brazilian cities , white workers earn nearly twice as much as those of asian descent . Up until 2011 , black or mixed-race students also spent two years less at school on average .
The government says the gap is closing thanks to quota systems for university places and other forms of affirmative action . But the gulf remains patently evident . The large plurality of business and government executives are white , while most menial jobs are done by black and mixed-race workers . Walk through Ipanema , Gávea or other trendy districts and you are far more likely to see black nannies bringing strollers with white toddlers than a white nanny pulling a black child .
Defining color is complex . People who define themselves as white were in the minority for the first time in the most recent Census in 2010 . Among the 197 million popula , 82 million said they were “ pardu ” [ mixed race ) , 15 million black , two million Asian and 0.5 percent Aboriginal .
Sylvio Ferreira , a science professor at the Federal University of Pernambuco , believes Anitta has won the hearts of the middle class by taking a bratty sound and making it tamer and more amenable to everyone .
“ Was this attained by racial whitening ? No , ” he said . “ What happened was a change of the social space where Anitta produced her art : from the periphery to the centre . ”
Others agree that the problem of color is overstated . Maycon de Mattos Batista , a financial economist who worked with Anitta while she was an intern , said there had been a small change in Anitta ’ s image , but not of her color .
“ I don ’ t believe it ’ s whitening ; it ’ s more the way they are providing her with makeup , hairstylists and the way she dresses , ” he said . “ I don ’ t think that was because of pressure being put on her . She always liked to show off , sang and dance . That was a natural thing for her . I believe that it is because of this lightness that she is where she is today . ”
Leandro Silva de Souza , a racial empowerment advocate in the north-eastern city of Salvador , said the bigotry lay not with society but with music producers and media executives . The public , he said , proved they were interested in music for its own sake by selecting Ellen Oléria – a black bisexual – as the recent winner of the talent show The Voice Brazil .
The Guardian was unable to reach Anitta for comment . But , in a recent interview , she characterized the need for identity to be self-defined .
“ All-powerful is a woman who doesn ’ t need to be beautiful , but she has so much mindset that she is awesome , she is powerful . What I try to pass on in my work for everyone is that we can be who we want . ”