The divisive auction of a Banksy painting that faded from the wall of a north London shop in shadowy circumstances was greatly stopped just moments before it was due to go under the hammer .
Slave Labour , a spray-painted mural evoking a child making Union Flag bunting and seen as a important social commentary on last year ’ s diamond jubilee , was predicted to sell for about $ 700,000 in a sale of street and modern art in Florida .
But jeweler Frederic Thut , the owner of the Fine Arts Auction Miami art house , who had refused all week to reveal the origin of the buyer or how it came to be listed for sale through his museum , announced that the snippet , along with a second work by the shadowy British street artist , had been rescinded .
He would not give a reason , but community leaders in Haringey , who led a vociferous campaign to stop the sale of the artwork that was prised from the wall of a Poundland in Wood Green , were joyous .
“ One of our two demands was that it doesn ’ t sell and the other was that we get it back again , so we ’ re halfway there , ” said Alan Strickland , a Haringey councilor .
“ I will be writing to the auction house as a matter of seriousness to explain what happened and what will happen next , but for now we are really pleased that because of the pressure and the strong views of the people of Wood Green , a community campaign in London has had an impact in the US . It ’ s a real win for the people . ”
Claire Kober , Leader of Haringey Council , wrote to Arts Council England and the Mayor of Miami , Tomás Regalado , to beg them to intercede to stop the sale but it seems the decison to cancel the item came from the gallery owners in consulation with their lawyers . The FBI refused to reveal reports they were asked to examine .
Several hours after the conclusion of the auction , the auction house issued a terse statement arguing it had cajoled the owners of the two Banksys to pull them from the sale . “ Although there are no constitutional issues whatsoever concerning the sale of lots six and seven by Banksy , FAAM enticed its sellers to cancel these lots from the auction . ”
About 30 possible buyers visited the sale of 106 lots listed in the catalog for the modern , modern and street art sale in Miami ’ s upscale Wynwood neighborhood . The three-hour sale persisted with other early lots selling in excess of their asking prices .
Critics have chided the auction house of dealing in stolen property but Thut said earlier in the week that the buyer , who he characterized as a “ well known collector ” , was the rightful owner and that the sale was constitutional .
He added that his museum had been flooded with e-mail and phone calls from the UK , saying that many of them were neglectful or offensive , but said he supported the incorporation of the pieces in the sale because it would protect them .
The second Banksy due to be sold , a 2007 illustration entitled Wet Dog that was deleted from a Bethlehem wall and is predicted to be worth up to $ 800,000 , crumbled from the auction house ’ s online catalog at 3pm on Saturday , but Slave Labour was still listed for sale right up to the 3pm start time .
Thut said the two pieces , supplied to him by separate owners , neither of them British , were important works in the street art scene and merited buyers “ whose first interest is in art and its preservation ” .
He said he would retain the confidentiality of the collector who put it up for sale . “ We respect our clients and their privacy . It ’ s not our decison to have [ the Banksy ] returned . We only sell it . We do not have control of it . ”
A spokeswoman for Poundland said it had no idea who deleted the 4ft x 5ft woodaplank from the side of the shop it rents in Turnpike Lane . Lawyers for the owner of the building , a company called Wood Green Investments Ltd , have refused to reveal if it had anything to do with the episode .
Banksy himself has not commented on the Slave Labour furor , but has also condoned those who have tried to sell his sculpture , speaking out before the proposed sale of five of his pieces at a 2011 auction in New York . None found a purchaser .
Stephan Keszler , the trader behind that auction , believes selling Banksy ’ s works without his consent is legit .
“ He does something on other people ’ s property without asking . The owner of the property can do whatever they want with it , ” Keszler said .